More than 14 mio tons produced globally per year (French ministry of ecology)
Styrofoam is light weight 95 per cent air so this represents a huge volume.

USA throws away about 25 billion styrofoam cups per year, about 82 per person.

USA produces 3 million tons per year, 2.3 million tons end up in landfills,
much of the remainder finds its way into waterways. (US EPA)


Indeed, so-called "white pollution" is the most common form of marine debris and costs local governments millions in storm-drain cleanup.

Once Styrofoam packages make it to the ocean, the plastic eventually breaks down into smaller pieces and turns into a kind of garbage soup.

In the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, for example -- an area the size of a continent in the North Pacific Ocean -- there are almost three kilograms of plastic for every half-kilo of plankton, which has a devastating effect on aquatic life that confuse the two.

So why don't we recycle polystyrene instead of sending it adrift?

The technology does exist, says Tamer Boyaci, an assistant professor at the Desautels faculty of management at McGill University -- the problem is the cost.

"It's not viable because this type of plastic is very light and takes up a lot of space, so it has a low scrap value. People are not interested in collecting it."

The California Department of Conservation pegs the costs of recycling polystyrene at more than $3,000 US per tonne, meaning polystyrene has a negative scrap value. By comparison, glass costs $89 per tonne to recycle. The latest figures, from the American Chemistry Council for 2001, show less than one per cent of polystyrene is recycled in the U.S.

Polystyrene has been banned in about 30 municipalities in California, and a bill recently introduced would ban the use of polystyrene foam and non-recyclable containers by restaurant operators and retail food vendors statewide.

In Canada, interest in recycling plastic No. 6 is increasing, Boyaci says. Walmart Canada launched a program in October to have all of its Styrofoam packaging at eight stores in Ontario collected and recycled by Grace Canada, which then turns it into construction materials.

Around the same time, Toronto began curbside collection of polystyrene to send to a facility in Mississauga, which also accepts polystyrene from more than 100 other municipalities in Ontario, and turns it into picture frames and construction mouldings.

Efforts to expand polystyrene recycling in Quebec have fallen through-- not surprisingly given the economic recession, said Sally Potter, a spokesperson for the Canadian Plastics Industry Association.

"It's the same with plastic shopping bags, which are 100-per-cent recyclable, yet some people not aware of that," Potter said. "We have to get away from the bad stuff and look at the enormous potential."

The only real solution, environmentalists say, is to reduce our dependence on polystyrene.

"We always come back to the same thing. They say polystyrene is necessary for sanitation, transport, hygiene . . . but we did fine without it before," said Karel Menard of the Quebec Common Front for the Ecological Management of Waste.

It's not about returning to the days of candlelit caves, says Menard, but of finding new solutions. If the Styrofoam manufacturers and users were forced, through legislation, to internalize its environmental cost, they would come up with a new, viable and sustainable alternative.

A European Union directive, for example, obliges member states to recycle at least 55 per cent of their packaging waste.

"Right now, it's society that pays and we're living on credit when it comes to our waste products," Menard says.